DEPLOYMENT.md, before:

# Deployment Guide

This document describes how to run the project in **development** and how to deploy a **live environment** using Docker.

- Backend: FastAPI (`backend/`)
- Frontend: Next.js (`frontend/`)
- Orchestration: Docker Compose (`docker/docker-compose.yml`)

---

## 1. Development Environment

You have two main options:

- **A. Local dev without Docker** (run backend and frontend directly)
- **B. Local dev with Docker Compose** (db + backend + frontend together)

### A. Local Dev without Docker

#### 1. Backend (FastAPI)

Requirements:
- Python 3.11+
- PostgreSQL running locally

Steps:

1. **Create and activate virtualenv, install deps**
   ```bash
   cd backend
   python -m venv .venv
   source .venv/bin/activate  # Windows: .venv\Scripts\activate
   pip install -r requirements.txt
   ```

2. **Set environment variables**
   Configure values appropriate for your local DB and secrets:
   ```bash
   export DATABASE_URL="postgresql+asyncpg://USER:PASSWORD@localhost:5432/DB_NAME"
   export JWT_SECRET="dev-secret-change-me"
   export JWT_ALGORITHM="HS256"
   export ACCESS_TOKEN_EXPIRES_MIN=60
   ```

3. **Run the backend server**
   The Dockerfile uses `backend.presentation.app:app` as the FastAPI entrypoint. Use the same for dev:
   ```bash
   uvicorn backend.presentation.app:app --host 0.0.0.0 --port 8000 --reload
   ```

4. **Check the API**
   - Base URL: `http://localhost:8000`
   - Docs (if enabled): `http://localhost:8000/docs`

---

#### 2. Frontend (Next.js)

Requirements:
- Node.js 20+ (LTS recommended)

Steps:

1. **Install dependencies**
   ```bash
   cd frontend
   npm install
   ```

2. **Configure API base URL**
   Create `frontend/.env.local` and set:
   ```bash
   NEXT_PUBLIC_API_BASE_URL=http://localhost:8000
   ```

3. **Run the dev server**
   ```bash
   npm run dev
   ```

4. **Check the app**
   - Frontend: `http://localhost:3000`

---

### B. Local Dev with Docker

This uses `docker/docker-compose.yml` to run **PostgreSQL**, **backend**, and **frontend** together.

#### 1. Prepare environment

1. Copy and edit the Docker env file:
   ```bash
   cd docker
   cp .env.example .env
   ```

2. Open `.env` and set values:
   - `POSTGRES_USER`
   - `POSTGRES_PASSWORD`
   - `POSTGRES_DB`
   - `JWT_SECRET`
   - (optional, for host port mapping on your machine/VPS)
     - `DB_PORT` (default `5432`)
     - `BACKEND_PORT` (default `8000`)
     - `FRONTEND_PORT` (default `3000`)

`docker-compose.yml` will construct `DATABASE_URL` for the backend as:
```yaml
database_url: postgresql+asyncpg://${POSTGRES_USER}:${POSTGRES_PASSWORD}@db:5432/${POSTGRES_DB}
```

The frontend uses (from the browser's point of view):
```yaml
NEXT_PUBLIC_API_BASE_URL: http://localhost:${BACKEND_PORT:-8000}
```
so that API calls go through the host port exposed for the backend.

#### 2. Start services

From the `docker/` directory:

```bash
docker compose up --build
```

This will:
- Start `db` (PostgreSQL 16)
- Build and start `backend` using `docker/backend.Dockerfile`
- Build and start `frontend` using `docker/frontend.Dockerfile` (runs `npm run dev`)

You can then access (using the host ports you configured):
- Backend: `http://localhost:${BACKEND_PORT}` (default `8000`)
- Frontend: `http://localhost:${FRONTEND_PORT}` (default `3000`)

#### 3. Stop services

```bash
docker compose down
```

#### 4. Live code reload in Docker

`docker-compose.yml` mounts your source directories:
- `../backend` → `/app/backend`
- `../frontend` → `/app/frontend`
- `../shared` → `/app/shared`

This allows you to edit code on the host and see changes inside containers (depending on FastAPI and Next.js reload settings, which are enabled via `--reload` and `npm run dev`).

---

## 2. Live / Production Deployment

There are many ways to run this in production; this section describes a **simple single-server Docker deployment** using the same Dockerfiles.

### Option 1: Single Server with Docker Compose

#### 1. Prepare a deployment server

On your target server (e.g. cloud VM):

- Install:
  - Docker
  - Docker Compose (or `docker compose` CLI plugin)
- Ensure ports are free:
  - `80`/`443` for HTTP/HTTPS (you might front with a reverse proxy like Nginx/Traefik)
  - `8000` (backend, if exposed) and `3000` (frontend, if exposed) or map them behind a proxy.

#### 2. Copy the project to the server

Typical approach:

```bash
# On your local machine
scp -r iliketohave USER@SERVER:/opt/iliketohave
```

On the server, go to the project:

```bash
cd /opt/iliketohave/docker
```

#### 3. Configure production environment

Edit `/opt/iliketohave/docker/.env` with **strong, non-dev values**:

- `POSTGRES_USER`
- `POSTGRES_PASSWORD`
- `POSTGRES_DB`
- `JWT_SECRET` (long random secret)
- (add any other envs you need, e.g. CORS, logging level, etc.)

Ensure that `docker-compose.yml` ports are mapped as desired for production via the env vars in `docker/.env`.

For example, if this project shares a VPS with others, you might set:

- `BACKEND_PORT=8100`
- `FRONTEND_PORT=3100`

Then Docker will expose:

- Backend: `8100:8000`
- Frontend: `3100:3000`

You may later choose to **only expose frontend publicly** and route backend through an internal network.

#### 4. Build and run in detached mode

From the `docker/` directory on the server:

```bash
docker compose up --build -d
```

- `-d` runs containers in the background.
- Containers use the same `backend.Dockerfile` and `frontend.Dockerfile` as in dev.

Check status:

```bash
docker compose ps
```

View logs (for debugging):

```bash
docker compose logs -f backend
# or
docker compose logs -f frontend
```

#### 5. Access the live app

Depending on your server’s firewall, DNS, and chosen ports:

- Frontend (Next.js): `http://YOUR_SERVER_IP:${FRONTEND_PORT}`
- Backend (FastAPI): `http://YOUR_SERVER_IP:${BACKEND_PORT}`

You can put a reverse proxy (Nginx/Traefik/Caddy) in front to:
- Terminate TLS (HTTPS)
- Expose clean domains, e.g. `https://app.example.com`

### Option 2: Build and Push Images to a Registry

If you prefer separate build and run stages (CI/CD), you can:

1. **Build backend image**
   ```bash
   docker build -t your-registry/iliketohave-backend:TAG -f docker/backend.Dockerfile .
   ```

2. **Build frontend image**
   ```bash
   docker build -t your-registry/iliketohave-frontend:TAG -f docker/frontend.Dockerfile .
   ```

3. **Push images**
   ```bash
   docker push your-registry/iliketohave-backend:TAG
   docker push your-registry/iliketohave-frontend:TAG
   ```

4. **On the server**, use a `docker-compose.yml` (or Kubernetes manifest) that **pulls** these images instead of building from source.

This lets you:
- Build images in CI
- Run only trusted, versioned images in production

---

## 3. Summary

- **Dev without Docker**
  - Backend: `uvicorn backend.presentation.app:app --reload` on port 8000
  - Frontend: `npm run dev` on port 3000, `NEXT_PUBLIC_API_BASE_URL=http://localhost:8000`

- **Dev with Docker**
  - From `docker/`: `docker compose up --build`
  - Uses local bind mounts for fast iteration

- **Live deployment (simple)**
  - Copy project to server
  - Configure strong secrets in `docker/.env`
  - `docker compose up --build -d`
  - Optionally front with a reverse proxy and TLS

Adjust ports, domains, and environment variables as needed for your infrastructure and security policies.

---

## 4. Database Migrations (Alembic)

Schema changes (new columns/tables) are managed with **Alembic**, which is already listed in `backend/requirements.txt`.

### 4.1 Generating a migration (dev)

1. Ensure `DATABASE_URL` is set (in your shell or via `.env`):
   ```bash
   export DATABASE_URL="postgresql+asyncpg://USER:PASSWORD@HOST:5432/DB_NAME"
   ```

2. From the `backend/` directory, after changing SQLAlchemy models:
   ```bash
   cd backend
   alembic revision --autogenerate -m "describe your change"
   ```

3. Review the generated file under `backend/alembic/versions/`, then apply it:
   ```bash
   alembic upgrade head
   ```

### 4.2 Running migrations with Docker (dev or prod)

When using Docker Compose, `DATABASE_URL` is provided via `docker/.env` and forwarded into the backend container.

- **Run migrations in the backend container**:
  ```bash
  # from the project root or docker/ directory
  docker compose run --rm backend alembic upgrade head
  ```

Typical flow for a deploy to the VPS:

1. Build/pull the new backend image.
2. Run migrations:
   ```bash
   cd docker
   docker compose run --rm backend alembic upgrade head
   ```
3. Start or restart services:
   ```bash
   docker compose up -d
   ```

This keeps dev and prod schemas in sync without running manual SQL on the server.

Commit message:

Add public user profile pages with commenter name display and deployment script
Implement public user profile endpoint that displays user information and their public wishlists. Update comment responses to include commenter names resolved from user profiles. Add clickable links to commenter profiles on public wishlist pages. Include deploy.sh script for production deployments using docker-compose overlay. Update documentation to clarify APP_ENV-based entrypoint behavior and production deployment workflow

DEPLOYMENT.md, after:

# Deployment Guide

This document describes how to run the project in **development** and how to deploy a **live environment** using Docker.

- Backend: FastAPI (`backend/`)
- Frontend: Next.js (`frontend/`)
- Orchestration: Docker Compose (`docker/docker-compose.yml`)

---

## 1. Development Environment

You have two main options:

- **A. Local dev without Docker** (run backend and frontend directly)
- **B. Local dev with Docker Compose** (db + backend + frontend together)

### A. Local Dev without Docker

#### 1. Backend (FastAPI)

Requirements:
- Python 3.11+
- PostgreSQL running locally

Steps:

1. **Create and activate virtualenv, install deps**
   ```bash
   cd backend
   python -m venv .venv
   source .venv/bin/activate  # Windows: .venv\Scripts\activate
   pip install -r requirements.txt
   ```

2. **Set environment variables**
   Configure values appropriate for your local DB and secrets:
   ```bash
   export DATABASE_URL="postgresql+asyncpg://USER:PASSWORD@localhost:5432/DB_NAME"
   export JWT_SECRET="dev-secret-change-me"
   export JWT_ALGORITHM="HS256"
   export ACCESS_TOKEN_EXPIRES_MIN=60
   ```

3. **Run the backend server**
   The Dockerfile uses `backend.presentation.app:app` as the FastAPI entrypoint. Use the same for dev:
   ```bash
   uvicorn backend.presentation.app:app --host 0.0.0.0 --port 8000 --reload
   ```

4. **Check the API**
   - Base URL: `http://localhost:8000`
   - Docs (if enabled): `http://localhost:8000/docs`

---

#### 2. Frontend (Next.js)

Requirements:
- Node.js 20+ (LTS recommended)

Steps:

1. **Install dependencies**
   ```bash
   cd frontend
   npm install
   ```

2. **Configure API base URL**
   Create `frontend/.env.local` and set:
   ```bash
   NEXT_PUBLIC_API_BASE_URL=http://localhost:8000
   ```

3. **Run the dev server**
   ```bash
   npm run dev
   ```

4. **Check the app**
   - Frontend: `http://localhost:3000`

---

### B. Local Dev with Docker

This uses `docker/docker-compose.yml` to run **PostgreSQL**, **backend**, and **frontend** together.

- In dev, containers run with `APP_ENV=development`.
- The backend and frontend entrypoint scripts use this to choose **reload/dev** behaviour.

#### 1. Prepare environment

1. Copy and edit the Docker env file:
   ```bash
   cd docker
   cp .env.example .env
   ```

2. Open `.env` and set values:
   - `POSTGRES_USER`
   - `POSTGRES_PASSWORD`
   - `POSTGRES_DB`
   - `JWT_SECRET`
   - (optional, for host port mapping on your machine/VPS)
     - `DB_PORT` (default `5432`)
     - `BACKEND_PORT` (default `8000`)
     - `FRONTEND_PORT` (default `3000`)

`docker-compose.yml` will construct `DATABASE_URL` for the backend as:
```yaml
database_url: postgresql+asyncpg://${POSTGRES_USER}:${POSTGRES_PASSWORD}@db:5432/${POSTGRES_DB}
```

The frontend uses (from the browser's point of view):
```yaml
NEXT_PUBLIC_API_BASE_URL: http://localhost:${BACKEND_PORT:-8000}
```
so that API calls go through the host port exposed for the backend.

#### 2. Start services

From the `docker/` directory:

```bash
docker compose up --build
```

This will:
- Start `db` (PostgreSQL 16)
- Build and start `backend` using `docker/backend.Dockerfile` with `APP_ENV=development` (runs `uvicorn` with `--reload`)
- Build and start `frontend` using `docker/frontend.Dockerfile` with `APP_ENV=development` (runs `npm run dev` via `entrypoint.sh`)

You can then access (using the host ports you configured):
- Backend: `http://localhost:${BACKEND_PORT}` (default `8000`)
- Frontend: `http://localhost:${FRONTEND_PORT}` (default `3000`)

This allows you to edit code on the host and see changes inside containers (depending on FastAPI and Next.js reload settings, which are enabled via `--reload` and `npm run dev`).

---

## 2. Live / Production Deployment

There are many ways to run this in production; this section describes a **simple single-server Docker deployment** using the same Dockerfiles plus a small production overlay compose file.

### Option 1: Single Server with Docker Compose (using prod overlay)

#### 1. Prepare a deployment server

On your target server (e.g. cloud VM):

- Install:
  - Docker
  - Docker Compose (or `docker compose` CLI plugin)
- Ensure ports are free:
  - `80`/`443` for HTTP/HTTPS (you might front with a reverse proxy like Nginx/Traefik)
  - `8000` (backend, if exposed) and `3000` (frontend, if exposed) or map them behind a proxy.

#### 2. Copy the project to the server

Typical approach:

```bash
# On your local machine
scp -r iliketohave USER@SERVER:/opt/iliketohave
```

On the server, go to the project:

```bash
cd /opt/iliketohave/docker
```

#### 3. Configure production environment

Edit `/opt/iliketohave/docker/.env` with **strong, non-dev values**:

- `POSTGRES_USER`
- `POSTGRES_PASSWORD`
- `POSTGRES_DB`
- `JWT_SECRET` (long random secret)
- (add any other envs you need, e.g. CORS, logging level, etc.)

Ensure that `docker-compose.yml` ports are mapped as desired for production via the env vars in `docker/.env`.

For example, if this project shares a VPS with others, you might set:

- `BACKEND_PORT=8100`
- `FRONTEND_PORT=3100`

Then Docker will expose:

- Backend: `8100:8000`
- Frontend: `3100:3000`

You may later choose to **only expose frontend publicly** and route backend through an internal network.

#### 4. Build and run in detached mode (production settings)

From the `docker/` directory on the server, use the base compose file **plus** the production overlay:

```bash
docker compose -f docker-compose.yml -f docker-compose.prod.yml up --build -d
```

The overlay `docker-compose.prod.yml`:
- Sets `APP_ENV=production` for backend and frontend.
- Disables bind mounts for source code (containers run the code baked into images).

- `-d` runs containers in the background.
- Containers use the same `backend.Dockerfile` and `frontend.Dockerfile` as in dev.

Check status:

```bash
docker compose ps
```

View logs (for debugging):

```bash
docker compose logs -f backend
# or
docker compose logs -f frontend
```

#### 5. Access the live app

Depending on your server’s firewall, DNS, and chosen ports:

- Frontend (Next.js): `http://YOUR_SERVER_IP:${FRONTEND_PORT}`
- Backend (FastAPI): `http://YOUR_SERVER_IP:${BACKEND_PORT}`

You can put a reverse proxy (Nginx/Traefik/Caddy) in front to:
- Terminate TLS (HTTPS)
- Expose clean domains, e.g. `https://app.example.com`

### Option 2: Build and Push Images to a Registry

If you prefer separate build and run stages (CI/CD), you can:

1. **Build backend image**
   ```bash
   docker build -t your-registry/iliketohave-backend:TAG -f docker/backend.Dockerfile .
   ```

2. **Build frontend image**
   ```bash
   docker build -t your-registry/iliketohave-frontend:TAG -f docker/frontend.Dockerfile .
   ```

3. **Push images**
   ```bash
   docker push your-registry/iliketohave-backend:TAG
   docker push your-registry/iliketohave-frontend:TAG
   ```

4. **On the server**, use a `docker-compose.yml` (or Kubernetes manifest) that **pulls** these images instead of building from source.

This lets you:
- Build images in CI
- Run only trusted, versioned images in production

---

## 3. Summary

- **Dev without Docker**
  - Backend: `uvicorn backend.presentation.app:app --reload` on port 8000
  - Frontend: `npm run dev` on port 3000, `NEXT_PUBLIC_API_BASE_URL=http://localhost:8000`

- **Dev with Docker**
  - From `docker/`: `docker compose up --build`
  - Uses local bind mounts for fast iteration with `APP_ENV=development`

- **Live deployment (simple)**
  - Copy project to server
  - Configure strong secrets in `docker/.env`
  - From `docker/`: `docker compose -f docker-compose.yml -f docker-compose.prod.yml up --build -d`
  - Runs backend and frontend with `APP_ENV=production` and no source bind mounts
  - Optionally front with a reverse proxy and TLS

Adjust ports, domains, and environment variables as needed for your infrastructure and security policies.

---

## 4. Database Migrations (Alembic)

Schema changes (new columns/tables) are managed with **Alembic**, which is already listed in `backend/requirements.txt`.

### 4.1 Generating a migration (dev)

1. Ensure `DATABASE_URL` is set (in your shell or via `.env`):
   ```bash
   export DATABASE_URL="postgresql+asyncpg://USER:PASSWORD@HOST:5432/DB_NAME"
   ```

2. From the `backend/` directory, after changing SQLAlchemy models:
   ```bash
   cd backend
   alembic revision --autogenerate -m "describe your change"
   ```

3. Review the generated file under `backend/alembic/versions/`, then apply it:
   ```bash
   alembic upgrade head
   ```

### 4.2 Running migrations with Docker (dev or prod)

When using Docker Compose, `DATABASE_URL` is provided via `docker/.env` and forwarded into the backend container.

- **Run migrations in the backend container**:
  ```bash
  # from the project root or docker/ directory
  docker compose run --rm backend alembic upgrade head
  ```

Typical flow for a deploy to the VPS:

1. Build/pull the new backend image.
2. Run migrations:
   ```bash
   cd docker
   docker compose run --rm backend alembic upgrade head
   ```
3. Start or restart services:
   ```bash
   docker compose up -d
   ```

This keeps dev and prod schemas in sync without running manual SQL on the server.
